Chief Secretary to the Treasury and
former Brexit Secretary. His
opposite number, the shadow chief
secretary Bridget Phillipson, his
first job was
firstjob was on the railways more
first job was on the railways more
than 40 years
firstjob was on the railways more
than A0 years ago and he is now
than 40 years ago and he is now
general
than A0 years ago and he is new
general secretary of the RMT union,
Mick Cash. Devi Sridhar, professor
of global public health at the
University of Edinburgh and a member
of the scientific committee advising
the Scottish Government on
coronavirus joins us from Edinburgh.
And entrepreneur and author,
chairman and owner of the chain such
as pim express
as pizza express and Patisserie
as pim express and Patisserie
Valerie
as pizza express and Patisserie
Valerie and a former chairman of
Channel 4,
Channelh, Luke
Valerie and a former chairman of
Channelh, Lukejohnson. Good
Channel 4, Luke johnson. Good
evening.
Channelh, Lukejohnson. Good
evening. Welcome to you, my
ChannelA, LukeJohnson. Good
evening. Welcome to you, my guess
that in the studio, socially
distance and to every thread are
from Edinburgh. Tonight we are going
to take
hhha
from Edinburgh. Tonight we are going
to take a combination of
pre—recorded and live questions and
pre-recorded and live questions and
I will also
pre—recorded and live questions and
I will also be bringing your
questions and comments in on social
media so I will feed those it as
well. Of course, if you are watching
at home, join the conversation on
social media. The first question
Time is from Daniel Guest.
I am starting a new key worker role
within the NHS next week.
However, my only means to get there
is by utilising public transport.
What can we do to ensure that key
workers who have no choice
but to use public transport will be
protected both at work
and on their commute?
Daniel, first of all,
congratulations on starting your new
rola. Mick,
role. Mick, as head of the RMT, let
rola. Mick, as head of the RMT, let
me start
role. Mick, as head of the RMT, let
me start with you. Firstly, I think
we should make sure key workers can
we should make sure key workers ran
travel for
we should make sure key workers can
travel for free on the networks.
Particularty
Particularly NHS workers. They are
Particularty NHS workers. They are
actually
Particularly NHS workers. They are
actually providing a hugely
important task and what we want to
make sure as a union and the rail
unions have been sitting down and
working with the rail industry to
make sure it is safe to travel on
the network. And do you think it is
at the moment because yellow from
some of the pictures I have seen in
the last few days, no, with the
overcrowding and decongestion on
platforms and trains. No, we had a
plan as an industry, that the
government threw into disarray when
they decided to release lockdown so
we got more people using the
we got more peopla using the
railways
we got more people using the
railways than we had planned for
which is putting everybody who
should, predominantly key workers,
at risk of travelling because of the
overcrowding particularly at peak
overcrowding particularty at peak
times.
overcrowding particularly at peak
times. We want to make sure we have
a regular service, they are
increasing the amount of trains next
week so that should make it safer.
If you have more trains running with
If you have more trains mnning with
fewer people.
If you have more trains running with
fewer people, you have the ability
to have social distancing and keep
safe and we want to make sure that
peopla feel
people feel safe and can travel to
peopla feel safe and ran travel to
and from
people feel safe and can travel to
and from work. The rail network, the
bus network, has been operating
throughout this crisis and I think
we should praise all of those
workers who have been doing that
activity. One of the things I have
learned from this particular crisis
is the amount of people that
is the amount of peopla that
actually
is the amount of people that
actually ensure that we, as a
society, ran
society, can run and operate,
society, ran nm and operate,
whether
society, can run and operate,
whether it’s NHS workers, care
whether it’s NHS workers, rare
walkers,
whether it’s NHS workers, care
walkers, transport workers, shop
workers, and they all need to have
the opportunity to get to work
safely. (“an I
safely. Can Ijust ask
the opportunity to get to work
safely. Can I just ask you,
safely. Can Ijust ask you, it has
safely. (“an Ijust ask you, it has
been reported
safely. Can Ijust ask you, it has
been reported that he will recommend
a strike if it is not made safe? No,
what we have said, and we have got
some real concerns about
overcrowding and the fact that you
can’t have two metre social
distancing on crowded trains. It is
not safe. So this talk of a strike
is... what
is... What we have said is that if
is... what we have said is that if
the trains
is... What we have said is that if
the trains are overcrowded and if
our members are put at risk, we are
saying to them, like any worker who
has a legal right, to protect
themselves, get to a place of safety
and get out of harms way, because
some of the things that we have
seen, some of the messaging we have
seen from the government, is
encouraging people, whether they
encouraging peopla, whether they
think it
encouraging people, whether they
think it or not, to get on trains,
make platforms and trains and buses
crowded and they are putting the
workers at risk so we are saying,
"No, if you are faced with that,
step back", but that could mean in
certain circumstances trains have to
be stopped. Luke? My wife works in
the NHS every day at a hospital that
has Covid patience and she is
wondering why, if she is having to
do that, why rail workers, for
example, who are, you know, the
drivers are in their cabin, so why
are they more at risk than the
health workers? It is not
necessarily that they are more at
risk, do you think they should be
equally at risk? Well, I don’t know
what safe means. When people say
what safe means. when peopla say
safe, do they
what safe means. When people say
safe, do they mean absolutely safe
in every possible way? Is two metres
social distancing scientifically
proven to keep us safe? I think all
of this obsession about being safe
all the time is not realistic in a
busy city like London, is it? I have
to say, I mean, you need to get your
facts right because you are 16 more
times likely to get coronavirus than
die if you are a London bus worker
than an NHS worker, and there has
been 28 bus workers in London, 42
TfL workers have died in London,
there’s been ten rail workers, and a
British transport worker dying of
coronavirus that we know of. We know
there is a lot of underreporting in
terms of the impact of the
coronavirus. So how are people going
coronavirus. So how are peopla going
to get to work?
coronavirus. So how are people going
to get to work? What we have planted
to get to work? what we have planted
it and
to get to work? What we have planted
it and look to do is make it as safe
as possiblo and
as possible and we did have a plan
as possibla and we did have a plan
to do
as possible and we did have a plan
to do that. We had a situation where
we have 50% of trains operating at
we have 5096 of trains operating at
this
we have 50% of trains operating at
this moment in time the next week
that was going up to 70% and a
that was going up to 7096 and a
gradual
that was going up to 70% and a
gradual increase that meant you
could accommodate more and more
travelling to and from work which
has been put under threat by the way
the government have released a
message about people getting on
trains. Let’s asked the government,
Mick (“ash says
Mick Cash says they had a plan but
Mick (“ash says they had a plan but
the
Mick Cash says they had a plan but
the government
the governmentjumped in weekly.
the government jumped in weekly.
Firstly,
the governmentjumped in weekly.
Firstly, congratulations to Daniel
on his new
on his newjob and picking up on
on his new job and picking up on
Mick’s point,
on his newjob and picking up on
Mick’s point, you talked about
capacity being low at the moment so
the first thing we need to do for
people like Daniel is to get the
services up and running, to expand
capacity back to normal so we have
more trains running, more buses
running, so there is more capacity.
Then we need to encourage those who
don’t need to use public transport
to walk or cycle where they can. A
to walk or cycle where they ran. A
very large
to walk or cycle where they can. A
very large number of people, 42% of
very large number of people, 4296 of
people, their
very large number of people, 42% of
people, their commute is less than
three miles. If we can increase,
three miles. If we ran increase,
particularty in
three miles. If we can increase,
particularly in areas like London,
particularty in areas like London,
the
particularly in areas like London,
the number of people walking and
the number of peopla walking and
cycling-
the number of people walking and
cycling, again, that takes pressure
off capacity to help people like
Daniel as key workers. 50 can you
Daniel as key workers. So ran you
see yourself
Daniel as key workers. So can you
see yourself doing that, walking or
carding
cycling to work? Yes, I’ve been in
the House of Commons quite often, I
would walk to work. What we have
would walk to work. what we have
done, coming
would walk to work. What we have
done, coming back to Daniel’s point
in terms of part of it, part of it
is encouraging others and we have
put investment into cycling to
encourage more cycling as part of
that but the third thing we need to
do is then have guidance for people
do is then have guidance for peopla
who are using
do is then have guidance for people
who are using the tube, support for
workers in terms of PPE where that
is appropriate in order to use the
capacity as safely as possible. But
in terms of cycling, we have seen a
massive increase in the use of
carding
cycling which is why we put
additional funding
additionalfunding into
cycling which is why we put
additional funding into supported.
additionalfunding into supported. I
will just feed
willjust feed you some messages we
will just feed you some messages we
have
willjust feed you some messages we
have had. "Is it inevitable we will
face a second wave given the
overcrowding we have seen in public
transport?" This one says, "After
seeing a large number of people on
the tube, should the government make
it compulsory to wear face coverings
on public transport?" "The scenes on
pub“:
public transport this week has been
horrific with people in tubes and
horrific with peopla in tubes and
buses
horrific with people in tubes and
buses crammed in and no social
distancing." In other European
cities, Berlin, Milan and Paris,
cities, Bertin, Milan and Paris,
they have
cities, Berlin, Milan and Paris,
they have introduced things on the
Metro, for example, stickers saying
where you ran
where you can enhance it, where you
where you ran enhance it, where you
ran and
where you can enhance it, where you
can and can’t stand and you have to
ran and can’t stand and you have to
have a
can and can’t stand and you have to
have a certificate if you want to go
to work in rush—hour, for example.
to work in rush-hour, for example.
If that something
to work in rush—hour, for example.
If that something the covenant is
considering? In the guidance,
there’s lots of sensible things we
would encourage people to do like
would encourage peopla to do like
using
would encourage people to do like
using contactless payment. So
using contacﬂass payment. So
nothing
using contactless payment. 50
nothing like that in terms of social
distancing? We can’t legislate for
everything or fact of life and every
single circumstance but there are
singla circumstance but there are
things that
single circumstance but there are
things that can be done. Face
things that ran be done. Face
coverings,
things that can be done. Face
coverings, the advice from Stage is
for things like public transport,
for short periods of time, they are
recommending it but there are things
in the guidance like contactless
in the guidance like contacﬂess
payments
in the guidance like contactless
payments that can be used but the
payments that ran be used but the
best thing to
payments that can be used but the
best thing to do is increase the
capacity which is why we need to see
for example in London, TfL getting
more tubes running that they have at
more tubes mnning that they have at
the
more tubes running that they have at
the moment. We are in negotiations
with them to do so. That is why we
have put 2.5 billion additional into
the rail to get the capacity going.
(“an I
(“an Ijust
the rail to get the capacity going.
(“an I just say,
Can Ijust say, that
the rail to get the capacity going.
Can I just say, that was the sort of
(“an I just say, that was the sort of
plan we had
Can I just say, that was the sort of
plan we had about increasing
capacity but also putting the key
messaging out, but the government
jumped the gun. To turn around and
55V
say that we ran
jumped the gun. To turn around and
say that we can get on a bike sounds
say that we ran get on a bike sounds
like it is
say that we can get on a bike sounds
like it is from the Marie Antoinette
School of crisis management, let
them use bikes. It’s not going to
solve the problem. You said yourself
that services were at 50% and the
that services were at 5096 and the
first thing for
that services were at 50% and the
first thing for people like Daniel
first thing for peopla like Daniel
who is
first thing for people like Daniel
who is trying to get work and again,
not just about many
notjust about many of our cities,
not just about many of our cities,
getting the
notjust about many of our cities,
getting the light rail capacity that
is used by many keel workers —— key
is used by many keel workers -- key
workers and
is used by many keel workers —— key
workers and the thing is to get as
many of the services... Why did you
many of the services... why did you
jump the gun,
many of the services... Why did you
jump the gun, then? Why did you turn
jump the gun, then? why did you turn
around
jump the gun, then? Why did you turn
around when we sat down and spent
two weeks of hard work making sure
that we had a plan for over a period
of time, to allow proper services,
safe services, did the government
jumped the gun, after the Prime
Minister’s speech on Sunday, we saw
an increase in usage on the rail
network and we saw people, our
members, having to deal with real
problams
problems about passengers. We had
one example of a passenger crying
berause
because she was worried about the
issue of social distancing on a
train with too many people turning
train with too many peopla turning
“P
up because of
train with too many people turning
up because of what the Prime
Minister said on Sunday. We had not
expected that. We did a deal last
week which had an incremental
change, phasing in improvements on
train services, increasing capacity
but also allowing safe increased
capacity and the government
capacity and the governmentjumped
capacity and the government jumped
the gun. It is
capacity and the governmentjumped
the gun. It is like the left hand
does not know what the right hand is
doing. We are talking to the DFT but
are they talking to Downing Street?
The DFI’
The DFT being the Department for
The DFI’ being the Department for
Transport.
The DFT being the Department for
Transport. Devi Sridhar, listening
to this, what is your view? Yes, I
just think it is tragic we are in
this situation. This issue about
safety, all this could have been
dealt with many weeks ago. Other
countries have stayed open and safe
by actually having public health
infrastructure in place to detect
infrastmclure in place to detect
who
infrastructure in place to detect
who had the virus so that when you
do travel, you know that you are not
going to be exposing others, you
know who is has got the virus and
who doesn’t so you can make sure
who doesn’t so you ran make sure
they are
who doesn’t so you can make sure
they are isolated. Listening to this
debate, is it safe currently to go
on public transport? I don’t think
so. Is it safe to open schools but I
don’t think so because we don’t have
in place the basic building blocks
of surveillance to know who has the
vims. If
virus. If the lockdown starts
vims. If the lockdown starts
opening up
virus. If the lockdown starts
opening up now before we have the
infrastructure in place, it is
infrastmclure in place, it is
basically
infrastructure in place, it is
basically pointless. You should use
the time to build the infrastructure
the time to build the infrastmcture
that actually,
the time to build the infrastructure
that actually, when you lift
lockdown, you are in a better
position than you were when you went
in and I think I’m trying to get my
head around is in the past eight
weeks, you has been in a lockdown
which is costly and crude, very
which is costly and cmde, very
drastic in
which is costly and crude, very
drastic in terms of the economic and
social effects as well as the
effects on nonessential services and
the NHS, what has fundamentally
changed in the past eight weeks to
put us in a better position to open
up? We are going to see cases go up,
I expect,
Iexpect, now,
up? We are going to see cases go up,
I expect, now, the virus will
continue spreading and in a few
weeks we are going to have this
exact same debate again and it
exact same debate again and itjust
exact same debate again and it just
feels quite
exact same debate again and itjust
feels quite tragic. Bridget, would
you travel on the tube at the
moment? I think this comes down for
the need for government to provide
clear guidance to all of us, it’s
dear guidance to all of us, it’s
not just about
clear guidance to all of us, it’s
not just about individual
notjust about individual choices
not just about individual choices
and
notjust about individual choices
and what we saw on Sunday with the
Prime Minister’s statement and what
followed was an unfortunate pattern
of confusion that I think has left a
lot of peopla
lot of people wondering what the
lot of peopla wondering what the
right thing
lot of people wondering what the
right thing is to do. It is quite
reasonable that all workers should
expect a safe working environment
and that has to be done carefully
and property.
and properly. It has to be worked
and property. It has to be worked
through with
and properly. It has to be worked
through with those affected, with
trade unions, too. And I don’t think
giving peopla
giving people such little notice
giving peopla such little notice
that they
giving people such little notice
that they could return to work has
helped in that way. There is also
the big issue that lots of workers
face real problems around what that
face real problams around what that
will
face real problems around what that
will mean for childcare while
schools remained closed in large
part other than to the children of
key workers and vulnerable children.
The government’s response to that is
to expect employed to negotiate that
on a case—by—case basis. Of course,
on a ase-by-rase basis. Of course,
the vast
on a rase-by-rase basis. Of course,
the vast majority
on a case—by—case basis. Of course,
the vast majority of businesses and
employers will want to do the right
thing and they are responsible but I
don’t think such big decisions that
have an effect on all of us can be
have an effect on allofus ran be
left
have an effect on all of us ran be
left some
have an effect on all of us can be
left some unclear. I think we needed
a clearer direction from government
and this confusion is really costly.
Specifically on transport, do you
think it is too early to be opening
think it is too earty to be opening
up, then?
think it is too early to be opening
up, then? Opening up the economy for
more workers to be going on public
transport, do you think it is too
soon? We recognise there needs to be
a phased move to greater economic
activity. But it is to sue now? It
is unfortunate the Prime Minister
and made a statement on Sunday with
no guidance to back it up or clearly
no guidance to back it up or dearty
thought
no guidance to back it up or clearly
thought through plan about how that
could be achieved and we’ve heard
from Mick this evening that if the
government was to work more closely
with trade unions and businesses and
try to find a more sensible way of
doing things, I think that would
leave people feeling safer. Do you
think it is too soon at the moment?
No, what we want to see is it is
done in a careful and gradual way,
so yes, where people can avoid
so yes, where peopla ran avoid
pub“:
so yes, where people can avoid
public transport, they should do so
and Steve is right to say that but
it should not rest on individuals
simply making that decision. We have
personal
personaljudgment and discretion,
personal judgment and discretion,
yes, but the
personaljudgment and discretion,
yes, but the absence of clear
direction from the government is
damaging. White Macalou, you just
damaging. white Maralou, you just
had a big sigh.
damaging. White Macalou, you just
had a big sigh. Did it? I
had a big sigh. Did it? Ithink
damaging. White Macalou, you just
had a big sigh. Did it? I think one
of the unfortunate things that has
happened is that the country has got
petrified. We are the most nervous
large nation of any. 50 the
government’s propaganda has
frightened us rigid... I mean, it
does look like we had the
second—highest debts so maybe
second-highest debts so maybe
there’s
second—highest debts so maybe
there’s a reason for that. How many
peopla who
people who have no other morbidity
peopla who have no other morbidity
is under
people who have no other morbidity
is under the age of 60 have died
from this illness? Who have no other
from this illness? who have no other
morbidity is
from this illness? Who have no other
morbidity is because I can tell you
morbidity is because I ran tell you
hammy
morbidity is because I can tell you
hammy people under 65 have died?
hammy peopla under 65 have died?
Maralou
hammy people under 65 have died?
Macalou —— under 60 with no other
Maralou -- under 60 with no other
morbidity is,
Macalou —— under 60 with no other
morbidity is, 350, you’re more
likely to drown. More people a year
likely to drown. More peopla a year
drown. I
likely to drown. More people a year
drown. I think we have to get things
a bit in context. What can that
a bit in context. what ran that
offer to
a bit in context. What can that
offer to the families of those who
have lost loved ones? Every death is
tragic but believe me, we are
entering, we are already in the
largest recession for 300 years. In
fact, it is not
fact, it is notjust one recession,
fact, it is not just one recession,
the bank
fact, it is notjust one recession,
the bank of England has said the
economy will shrink by 1A%, that is
economy will shrink by 1496, that is
the
economy will shrink by 1A%, that is
the equivalent of two
economy will shrink by 14%, that is
the equivalent of two recessions, it
is a depression. I wouldn’t be
surprised if we have 2 million more
unemployed people within a year.
Imagine the agony of 2 million more
unemployed people. How many deaths
might ﬂow
might flow from that? How many
might ﬂow from that? How many
deaths
might flow from that? How many
deaths are flowing from the fact we
deaths are ﬂowing from the fact we
have got half
deaths are flowing from the fact we
have got half as many A&E
appointments at the moment is to
mark cancer patients are not being
seen, people with heart disease are
not being seen. And the collateral
damage of this campaign of fear and
lockdown has to be taken into
account. Very soon, I believe,
lockdown will be causing more deaths
than the virus. Just to be clear, in
than the vims. just to be clear, in
terms of
than the virus. Just to be clear, in
terms of deaths amongst those under
65 in total related to coronavirus,
65 in total related to coronavims,
it is over
65 in total related to coronavirus,
it is over 4000. Under 60, I said.
Yes, some of them have
comorbidities, it is not necessarily
that they were going to die anyway
but they have other conditions they
live with. Every thread are, you are
shaking your head?
radical I want to come back to the
point about putting the economy
versus public health and that is a
mistake. These are in the same side.
Containment is good for public
health and the economy and that’s
what we are seeing from the
countries that moved early, their
countries that moved earty, their
locks
countries that moved early, their
locks down fast, that actually took
the drastic measures, contain the
virus and are able to open up now. I
think having these kind of debates
in Febmary
in February and March is what
created such confusion. What is the
Government’s strategy? To let the
virus mn
virus run through and stay within
virus mn through and stay within
NHS
virus run through and stay within
NHS capacity and basically think
that will save the economy? We are
learning that is not the right way,
the way is to get on top of the
virus aggressively, stay in lockdown
longer, stay in lockdown longer, do
it right and ease it and it is a
one-way
one—way street. Right now the
one-way street. Right now the
problem as
one—way street. Right now the
problem as it is not like the virus
magically disappears as we open, it
will still be around so that means
it will continue spreading and at
some point NHS capacity will be
strained, we have already lost
60,000 people, and we are 10% of the
60,000 peopla, and we are 1096 of the
“Y
way through
60,000 people, and we are 10% of the
way through this, if we are
fortunate we will find out soon. We
have a long way to go and the way to
do this is to stay in lockdown, get
out property, it
out properly, it is a one—way
out property, it is a one-way
street, to
out properly, it is a one—way
street, to stop putting the economy
versus public health, they are both
on the same side. Let me come back
to Daniel. What do you think of what
to Daniel. what do you think of what
you have heard
to Daniel. What do you think of what
you have heard going back to your
original question about public
transport? I think firstly there is
nothing wrong with trying to keep as
many peopla
many people are safe as possible.
many peopla are safe as possible.
Secondly, I
many people are safe as possible.
Secondly, I think we keep hearing a
similar rhetoric from people like
Stephen and others in government but
the fact is some of our public
transport is still crowded and that
means we need more action and the
government needs to work
collaboratively with trade unions
and other parties to try and solve
this. Steve, you want to come back
in? The whole point of the
government strategy has been to get
the R down and through the public
efforts that has happened. It has
enabled us to have a gradual
phasing, which is what we have set
out, where we have a gradual phasing
where we switch back on the economy,
retail in june at
retail inJune at areas like
hospitality in
hospitality inJuly but it’s
conditional, conditional on keeping
that infection rate down. Where I do
that infection rate down. where I do
agree as it is not
that infection rate down. Where I do
agree as it is not a choice between
health and the economy because a
second peak of infection would be
hugely damaging from an economic
point of view. The Governor of the
Bank of England made a similar point
last night in terms of the effect
that would have on public
confidence. So we do need to get the
infection down. That’s why we have
taken the unprecedented measures but
we now need to have a phased
approach to the economy conditional
on keeping the R down. We may come
back to the economy shortly. Daniel,
thank you for your question. Let me
take a question from Samantha
Grainger now. Hello.
One of the most important things
about managing this crisis
is the clarity of communication
by the government.
Following the release of the new key
message by the PM on the weekend,
does the panel feel that
"stay alert, control
the virus, save lives" has
any
real meaning for the public?
Does it have any meaning for you,
Samantha? What do you think of it? I
Samantha? what do you think of it? I
think it’s a
Samantha? What do you think of it? I
think it’s a lot more vague than the
original message, I think it is
really confusing and I think it’s
very hard to get any clear message
over to the public with this. And do
you think, I’m just wondering, is
that inevitable, perhaps, when we
are moving out of lockdown, that
things will be slightly more woolly,
for want of a better phrase? I think
the message has changed too quickly.
I think changes could have been made
without rushing ahead in the way
that I feel this is. Has it changed
what you are doing come out of
interest? I am actually shielding so
it makes no difference to me. 0K.
Stephen, there has been a lot of
talk about the message, there has
been a YouGov poll suggesting that
SON:
30% find the new slogan, let’s call
3096 find the new slogan, let’s all
it that,
30% find the new slogan, let’s call
it that, unclear, 90% found the old
it that, unclear, 9096 found the old
one much
it that, unclear, 90% found the old
one much clearer. You can’t be happy
with that? There is no question that
the slogan stay at home was hugely
effective, look would say to
effective because polling is showing
the British public are more fearful
of the virus than other Western
societies, even though it is the
same virus that we are all
confronting. Although our focus
EWUP
group shows that actually the new
message has also resonated with the
pub“:
public and I think we have to treat
the public as advanced adults. What
the public as advanced adults. what
does
the public as advanced adults. What
does resonated mean? Because people
does resonated mean? Because peopla
do
does resonated mean? Because people
do understand. You have 90% in one
do understand. You have 9096 in one
poll
do understand. You have 90% in one
poll suggesting it is unclear. We
have to treat the public with
respect, they do understand that we
need to apply common sense, those
that need to stay at home to stay at
home, those who can’t and need to
work do so. They work with their
employers, they then put in measures
to ensure that those workplaces are
Cove so, the way the British public
has responded shows they understand
what the message requires, we have
been successful in getting the
infection rate down and we need to
continue in the British public
understand that. —— Covid—19. Do you
understand that. -- Covid-19. Do you
support this
understand that. —— Covid—19. Do you
support this message and if not what
would your message have been? It was
all was going to build more complex
at this stage and the difficult
at this stage and the difficultjob
at this stage and the difficult job
the
at this stage and the difficultjob
the government has communicating in
this next stage. It is unfortunate
we have had such confusion. With the
announcement on Sunday from the
Prime Minister with the delay that
followed in their being proper
guidance with further guidance to
follow and this is just the start of
what will be a challenging process.
what will be a challanging process.
The
what will be a challenging process.
The government are moving towards
looking at a phased return for some
children to school. Again, getting
the communication on that will be
absolutely crucial, but it will also
absolutely cmcial, but it will also
involve
absolutely crucial, but it will also
involve parents feeling confident in
sending their children back to
sending their children hack to
school.
sending their children back to
school. We will need to make sure
that school staff, all school staff,
are confident they have a safe
working environment. If we don’t get
that right, it will mean that
children don’t return, it will mean
that lots of people feel extremely
anxious and worried about what the
future will hold. Of course, the
reason for some of this worry is
quite legitimate in that our testing
rates are still far too low, the
government has consistently failed
to meet its targets around testing.
Testing is of course not a strategy
in and of itself, it is a means to
achieving an outcome. But if we are
going to move through this process,
if we are going to trust the British
peopla to
people to exercise more judgment,
then we must have clear messages
from government around what that
involves and what that looks like
and also move to a much stronger
position on testing so that we can
position on testing so that we ran
all feel
position on testing so that we can
all feel confident that what’s being
asked of us by government is being
informed not
informed notjust buy the best
medical advice and scientific advice
but that we can be safe when we go
but that we ran be safe when we go
to work
but that we can be safe when we go
to work and
but that we ran be safe when we go
to work and go
but that we can be safe when we go
to work and go around our business.
(“an I be
Can I be clear in terms of Labour’s
(“an I be clear in terms of Labour’s
position, I
position, I was —— are you
position, I was -- are you
supporting
position, I was —— are you
supporting the Conservative
Government’s position or is Labour
Government’s position or is labour
more
Government’s position or is Labour
more supportive of the Labour
government’s position in Wales which
government’s position in Walas which
is to keep
government’s position in Wales which
is to keep the lockdown in place. We
have said we will work
constructively with the government,
we want it to succeed because it’s
vital for the country at a time of
national crisis to have that
constructive relationship. 50
constructive relationship. So you
think the Welsh are wrong? Certain
areas are devolved. Of course it
would have been better if all four
parts of the United Kingdom had
moved in lockstep and it is
disappointing the Prime Minister
wasn’t able to secure that consent.
What
what we
wasn’t able to secure that consent.
What we will need to see is much
what we will need to see is much
greater
What we will need to see is much
greater testing so that we can be
confident that all of these measures
don’t see an increase... You have
made that clear. To be clear of your
position, you support the easing at
the moment? I know you are unhappy
with the messaging and the lack of
communication with the unions, but
do you think the right decision was
taken by the government this week to
begin to lift restrictions? There
was always going to come a point
when restrictions were eased. What I
when restrictions were eased. what I
think it’s
when restrictions were eased. What I
think it’s unnecessary is the
arbitrary dates. To put arbitrary
dates on it and rush it without the
proper guidance in place is
unnecessary and we have seen the
impact that has on public transport
and we have put an arbitrary date on
the phased return of school
reopening for some children. It is
better to get it right than to rush
it. The government of the people
relying upon the evidence to
determine whether it is exactly the
right point. It is not for us to
provide an alternative narrative
around that. What we will do is
around that. what we will do is
back-up the
around that. What we will do is
back—up the government where they
back-up the government where they
are getting it
back—up the government where they
are getting it right and be critical
and offer alternatives where we feel
they aren’t. On testing and the lack
of PPE and the problems we face in
social care the fact a lot of school
social rare the fact a lot of school
staff are
social care the fact a lot of school
staff are worried about what is
coming, the government has to take
the public with us. I agree with
Steve, it involves treating people
as adults but to do that there has
to be openness and transparency. Can
to be openness and transparency. (“an
I clarify a point?
to be openness and transparency. Can
I clarify a point? We have not put
our between dates, we said it would
be informed by science, by SAGE
unconditional what the infection
rate is. Today we have seen the
highest level of testing, massive
ramping up of testing, 120,000 tests
today. You are right testing is
important.
important. Sorry, Stephen, 126,000
tests. . .
tests... 127,000 tests. How many
peopla were
people were tested? That’s the
results of 127,000. I think you will
find it 76,000 people actually
find it 76,000 peopla actually
tested,
find it 76,000 people actually
tested, 127,000 tests were carried
out, 76,000 people. 76,600 people
out, 76,000 peopla. 76,600 peopla
were actually
out, 76,000 people. 76,600 people
were actually tested. 50 not 126,000
were actually tested. So not 126,000
people. It’s
were actually tested. 50 not 126,000
people. It’s important. It’s
were actually tested. So not 126,000
people. It’s important. It’s about
peopla. It’s important. It’s about
peopla. It’s
people. It’s important. It’s about
people. It’s not
people. It’s notjust a test in
peopla. It’s not just a test in
itself.
people. It’s notjust a test in
itself. 71,600 people tested. I want
itself. 71,600 peopla tested. Iwant
to clarify this.
itself. 71,600 people tested. I want
to clarify this. 30% find the new
to clarify this. 3096 find the new
slogan and
to clarify this. 30% find the new
slogan and clear, 90% found the old
slogan and clear, 9096 found the old
slogan clear.
slogan and clear, 90% found the old
slogan clear. Luke, listening to
slogan dear. Luke, listening to
this, this is
slogan clear. Luke, listening to
this, this is about the message. But
you feel that we shouldn’t be in the
lockdown at all, do you? What
disappointed me most about the Prime
Minister’s speech, which I think was
vague and wasn’t really paying
attention to the message, was the
fact he repeated the line that I
think is a figure first put about by
Niall Ferguson, we have avoided
500,000 deaths. I don’t fix country
was ever facing
was everfacing 500,000
500,000 deaths. I don’t fix country
was ever facing 500,000 deaths,
was everfacing 500,000 deaths, I
was ever facing 500,000 deaths, I
think
was everfacing 500,000 deaths, I
think that was a ludicrous
exaggeration, it was scaremongering.
exaggeration, it was sraremongering.
It was
exaggeration, it was scaremongering.
It was half a million if nothing was
done. A bit like Sweden. Estimating
about ten times the number of deaths
they have had if his model had been
followed. And I don’t have a great
deal of confidence in a lot of the
advice the government is getting,
I’m afraid. And so
I’m afraid. And sol
advice the government is getting,
I’m afraid. And so I think that’s my
problem with this speech. Let’s ask
David because you are giving advice
to the Scottish Government. What is
to the Scottish Government. what is
your take? --
to the Scottish Government. What is
yourtake? —— Devi. I
yourtake? —— Devi. Ithink people
your take? -- Devi. Ithink peopla
are fearful
yourtake? —— Devi. Ithink people
are fearful because they don’t know
where the virus is and they’re
where the virus is and therre
looking at
where the virus is and they’re
looking at the neighbouring
countries and seeing other countries
seem to be on top of it. A clear way
seem to be on top of it. A clear my
to figure out how
seem to be on top of it. A clear way
to figure out how on top of that you
are is through testing. If you are
testing people and less than 2% are
testing peopla and lass than 296 are
positive you
testing people and less than 2% are
positive you are in pretty good
shape, this is where South Korea and
New Zealand are. If you are testing
peopla at
people at around 5% you barely have
peopla at around 596 you barely have
a handla
people at around 5% you barely have
a handle on it, if it is over 10%
a handla on it, if it is over 1096
you have a huge
a handle on it, if it is over 10%
you have a huge problem and we are
finding over 1096
finding over 10% and it leads to the
finding over 1096 and it leads to the
question,
finding over 10% and it leads to the
question, where is this virus? What
question, where is this vims? what
we actually
question, where is this virus? What
we actually need is clear
information and local information on
transmission in different parts of
the country. If you know they are
part of the country where
transmission is very low and there
is a low number of cases then
is a low number of cases than
obviously it
is a low number of cases then
obviously it is safer for people to
obviously it is safer for peopla to
go out and
obviously it is safer for people to
go out and you can share that
information and people actually know
information and peopla actually know
this. This
information and people actually know
this. This is a strategy many other
countries are taking. And just a
note on the Sweden, Sweden has one
of the highest death rates per
million in the world, and far higher
than its neighbouring countries. But
not higher than Belgium or Holland.
Lower. They themselves said they
have not protected the elderly and
vulnerable. Can I ask you about
vulnerable. (“an I ask you about
Luke’s point
vulnerable. Can I ask you about
Luke’s point about the 500,000
predicted deaths if nothing was done
in this country, 500,000 over a
couple of years. I didn’t say that,
he just said
hejust said 500,000. You think
he just said 500,000. You think
that’s
hejust said 500,000. You think
that’s nonsense. That was
scaremongering. Do you think that
sraremongering. Do you think that
was
scaremongering. Do you think that
was nonsense, Devi? We have had
60,000 estimated deaths so far. We
are 1096
are 10% of the way through this. If
are 1096 of the way through this. If
we think
are 10% of the way through this. If
we think we reach some kind of
immunity at 80% we basically have to
immunity at 8096 we basically have to
lose eight
immunity at 80% we basically have to
lose eight times that amount, so
actually the figures are slightly
lower than the ones estimated but
they are still incredibly high. It’s
a lot of people that we would lose
a lot of peopla that we would lose
if
a lot of people that we would lose
if we just took a strategy rather
than actually trying to suppress the
outbreak, wait for a therapeutic,
wait for a vaccine and actually be
able to... When did they discover a
able to... when did they discover a
vaccine for
able to... When did they discover a
vaccine for Aids. We have
anti—retrovirals for Aids. But how
anti-retrovirals for Aids. But how
long did that
anti—retrovirals for Aids. But how
long did that take? Mick, I’m going
to come to you, but I want to play
to come to you, but I wantto play
in
to come to you, but I want to play
in one other dip
in one other clip which is on a
in one other dip which is on a
similar
in one other clip which is on a
similar subject, Jane Fallon. I will
similar subject, jane Fallon. I will
come
similar subject, Jane Fallon. I will
come back to you Samantha.
As a grandmother, I’m unable
to enter my grandchildren’s homes.
However, as their Childminder,
I would be able to enter their home
and they could come to my home.
Please can the rationale
for this be explained?
Perhaps it’s purely financial
as one does not allow
their parents to work,
that’s me, seeing my grandchildren,
spending a little bit of time
with them, while the other does.
Garden centres have been permitted
to open, as they are beneficial
to mental health, but surely
seeing your family is even better
for your mental health
and I’m saying this
as a grandmother to eight.
So,
50, Jane
So, Janejust
50, Jane just doesn’t really
understand why you made the decision
you have. I
you have. Iwill come
understand why you made the decision
you have. I will come back to you,
but Mick, let’s hear
but Mick, let’s hearfrom
you have. I will come back to you,
but Mick, let’s hear from you.
but Mick, let’s hearfrom you. I
but Mick, let’s hear from you. I
watched
but Mick, let’s hearfrom you. I
watched what was billed something
important, the speech on Sunday, so
there might have been more people
watching EastEnders. It was about 30
million, I think.
million, Ithink. I may have
watching EastEnders. It was about 30
million, I think. I may have that
wrong but I think it’s 30 million. I
sat down and watched it and turned
round to my wife and said, what did
he say? That stay alert, I think
he say? That stay alart, I think
I’ve
he say? That stay alert, I think
I’ve been alert for quite a period
of time. why
of time. Why he wants me to stay
of time. why he wants me to stay
alart, I
alart, Idon’t
of time. Why he wants me to stay
alert, I don’t know. Then we find
alart, I don’t know. Then we find
out in dribs
alert, I don’t know. Then we find
out in dribs and drabs over the
following few days about other
easing about what you can and can’t
easing about what you ran and can’t
do. The
easing about what you can and can’t
do. The example there, I’ve got
three grandkids, my wife and I have
had the same debate. We haven’t been
able to see them. Skype and FaceTime
and things like that but there seems
to be an inconsistency, and
inconsistency into the point that
you ran go to
you can go to a park and
you can go to a park and keep two
you ran go to a park and keep two
metres away
you can go to a park and keep two
metres away from somebody but you
ran get on a
can get on a jam—packed bus or
ran get on a jam-packed bus or
train.
can get on a jam—packed bus or
train. There is a lot of
inconsistency in what the government
is saying. (“an I
is saying. Can Ijust pick up on
is saying. (“an Ijust pick up on
something
is saying. Can Ijust pick up on
something Luke said to me early on
something Luke said to me earty on
but that’s
something Luke said to me early on
but that’s worrying me about this
whola
whole debate about Luke’s rationale.
whola debate about Luke’s rationala.
I’d like to
whole debate about Luke’s rationale.
I’d like to know what you mean about
campaign of fear. All the issues
that we are raising, the concerns we
have got more people are dying. I’ve
have got more peopla are dying. I’ve
had have
have got more people are dying. I’ve
had have been on the rail with me
for 40 odd
for A0 odd years and they said when
for 40 odd years and they said when
this first
for A0 odd years and they said when
this first started, the government
got it right, stay—at—home. First
got it right, stay-at-home. First
started, I
got it right, stay—at—home. First
started, I don’t want to go to work,
I’m frightened for myself, I’m
frightened that I’m going to go home
and pass the virus on to my wife and
her elderty
her elderly parents. People have the
her elderty parents. People have the
right to be
her elderly parents. People have the
right to be fearful of what’s going
on because it is a deadly virus. I
on because it is a deadly vims. I
just wonder
on because it is a deadly virus. I
just wonder coming out of this
whether the government has got it
right, and hasn’t got it right, but
why it hasn’t got it right. And why
they haven’t put a clear messaging
they haven’t put a dear messaging
and a
they haven’t put a clear messaging
and a clear timetable so that we
understand where this is going to
end. They bludgeoned into this and
end. They hludgeoned into this and
they seem to
end. They bludgeoned into this and
they seem to be bludgeoning out of
it.
Samantha who asked the original
question accepted it will be more
complicated now when you spoke about
testing, the 126,000 tests, 71,600
actually tested but in terms of
messaging and making that clear and
transparent, do you feel you are
actually winning that battle? It is
actually winning that hath? It is
very
actually winning that battle? It is
very difficult for families and we
recognise that, I think for all our
families, with grandparents not able
to see grandchildren and that is one
of the heartbreaks of this crisis.
And when you hear Mick saying you
could meet someone in a park, if we
are meeting in a park it has to be
two metres distant but you can cram
two metres distant but you ran cram
onto a
two metres distant but you can cram
onto a tube or bus with somebody,
you are advising face coverings but
it is not mandatory. It is about
having a balance and what we are
trying to do is limit the amount of
travel on public transport but we
are trying to gradually phase back
the economy because as Luke alluded
to eartier,
to earlier, the economic damage this
to eartier, the economic damage this
has
to earlier, the economic damage this
has caused as a consequence of that.
There’s health consequences of the
fall in GDP and the impact of the
economy. There’s health consequences
in terms of wider treatment other
than Covid within the NHS so it is
important to have a strong economy
to pay for public services and
support people’s health and
well—being and phase part of that
well-being and phase part of that
but the
well—being and phase part of that
but the bigger risks the economy and
the UK is a second peak so we are
trying to do it in a measured way,
in a balanced way. The risk, as Sage
advises, of transmission outside is
lass than
less than it is inside. That is why
lass than it is inside. That is why
the
less than it is inside. That is why
the advice has been shaped in the
“Y
way it is. But it is conditional on
continuing to keep the infection
rate down and that is why it is a
very gradual approach. You talk
about the economy and we’ve got a
question about that from Aaron
jones.
At the start of Covid—19 crisis,
we were informed a mortality rate
of 20,000 would be a good outcome.
This has been exceeded.
It has also been reported
by Professor Spiegelhalter that
of the unexpected deaths,
there is a greater proportion
of non—Covid deaths
than official Covid deaths.
Given this, how do the panel rate
the government’s performance and has
the pill been worse than the ill?
Luke, from what you are saying so
far this evening, you think that it
has been worse? I think there is a
grave risk now that as we enter the
Knights week period of lockdown,
that that will be the case, yes.
that that will be the use, yes.
Virtually
that that will be the case, yes.
Virtually every other European
country is now opening up. Schools
are open, businesses are trading,
even restaurants and bars are
opening sometimes and yes, they are
practising social distancing but
dcarty,
clearly, they have got the same
dearty, they have got the same
virus
clearly, they have got the same
virus that we have and yes, some of
them have perhaps done testing
better than we have and maybe they
have treated patients better than we
have but overall, they are similar
and they are obviously taking a view
that they ran
that they can keep the virus under
that they ran keep the virus under
control
that they can keep the virus under
control and keep the deaths to a
minimum. As Stephen was saying, the
collateral damage in so many ways,
the unintended consequences of
lockdown are so severe that there
really is a ticking time bomb in
mental health terms and in Sony
other ways, the impact on our
children’s education, that it is not
something that we can possibly be
undertaken lightly. There is one
other thing I would like to say,
which I’m afraid to say is a
characteristic of this programme, so
there are five of us on the
programme, and I would say four out
of the five of us are in the public
sector. I am the only one in the
private sector. Actually, in terms
of the shape of the economy, 85% of
of the shape of the economy, 5596 of
the people
of the shape of the economy, 85% of
the people working in the economy
are in the private sector. And no
one here today is going to lose
their
theirjob because of Covid. But
believe me, there’s a real risk that
millions of people in the private
sector are going to see their
rareers
careers demolished and I think that
really matters. People say,
"Economics over lives", but
unemployment can kill people and
unemployment ran kill people and
either get
unemployment can kill people and
either get needs to be taken into
account and also, how are we going
to pay the £170 billion per year
that the NHS costs if the economy is
in the toilet? I will
in the toilet? I willjust say
because we are a political
programme, also going to have two or
three out of five politicians. But
they are public sector. But we are
political programme and that is why,
so do you think we should have had a
lockdown at all, then? I think
Sweden has done all right and time
will tell but I thing they have done
the right and they didn’t have a
lockdown. Well, they say they have
had a bit of a lockdown, and their
deaths are higher than Norway, for
example. Yes, but lower pro rafter
than Belgium or Holland. And the
effect on the economy in Sweden, the
central bank today said they thought
the economy could retract by between
six and 9.7%. But it is still not 1A
six and 9.796. But it is still not 14
which is
six and 9.7%. But it is still not 1A
which is what the Bank of England
says about ours. I said there
economy will suffer half as much of
ours and unemployment so far in
terms of the increase there has been
minimal. Bridget? The level of debt
are tragically high and behind each
number is a family devastated by
grief, we supported the government
going into lockdown, it was the
right thing to do. We have also
supported of the government in many
of the measures they have brought
forward to provide support to
workers and businesses to try to get
through this crisis. In some cases,
we think there needs to be extra
clarity and further changes needed
in order for us
in orderfor us to... Sorry!
in order for us to... Sorry!
Classic, a
in orderfor us to... Sorry!
Classic, 3 phone has gone off! Come
Classic, a phone has gone off! Come
on, Mick, sort
Classic, 3 phone has gone off! Come
on, Mick, sort it out! In terms of
the question, is the pill worse than
the ill? I don’t accept it is a
choice between saving lives, public
health and the economy. The lockdown
was necessary to save lives. We have
unfortunately seen we have amongst
the highest death rates in Europe.
That is deeply regrettable and has
caused grief and heartache for so
many families. That is why it is so
important that what comes next is
right, both in terms of testing,
also in social care, where we know
also in social rare, where we know
testing is not
also in social care, where we know
testing is not where it should be,
that far too many social care
that far too many social rare
workers
that far too many social care
workers are not getting access to
testing. PPE, unfortunately, still
remains a problem. But there’s a lot
of anxiety around what will come
next for the economy which is why we
support the government in taking the
steps they have to protect
steps they have to protectjobs and
steps they have to protect jobs and
living
steps they have to protectjobs and
living standards and businesses but
there will now need to be
conversation around what happens
next. Yes, job retention but also
job creation and a plan to get the
economy moving once more. Another
message has come in from David, "Why
message has come in from David, "why
wasn’t the
message has come in from David, "Why
wasn’t the strategy built around the
mortality age profile?" This plays
into what Luke was saying. "Only
fellow staff over 50, especially
males pose quit. Then that would be
malas pose quit. Then that would be
you!
males pose quit. Then that would be
you! "They Are twice as likely did
at that age goes wet. You would not
be working at all. "Throw the sink
at protecting the elderly, your five
at protecting the elderty, your five
times
at protecting the elderly, your five
times more likely to die at 80 than
20’. This
20". This is what David is saying so
20’. This is what David is saying so
I cannot verify
20". This is what David is saying so
I cannot verify that fact exactly.
Stephen, do you have any sympathy
with what Luke is saying, that there
should have been a lot done at all?
Know, because I think it was
important we protected the NHS. We
saw the scenes in countries like
Italy where the health system was
under massive sustained pressure and
one of the successes so far has been
in protecting the NHS and entering
it has sufficient capacity to meet
the number of patients that are
coming in. Coming back to one point
in Aaron’s question, he says at the
start of the crisis, they were
informed mortality rate of 20,000
would be a good outcome so that
20,000 was predicated over two
years. We are now two months in and
our mortality rate is north of
30,000. 50 do
30,000.50 do you think the
our mortality rate is north of
30,000. 50 do you think the strategy
30,000. So do you think the strategy
has been right?
30,000. 50 do you think the strategy
has been right? The strategy has
been right in terms of protecting
the NHS. To save lives, not
the NHS. To save lives, notjust for
the NHS. To save lives, not just for
the sake of
the NHS. To save lives, notjust for
the sake of it. And the capacity in
the NHS has enabled us to ensure
that it has not been overwhelmed in
the way that some other countries in
Europe has been. But Luke’s point
was around the economy and what the
OBR
mm and
was around the economy and what the
OBR and CBI have said, and the Bank
mm and CBI have said, and the Bank
of England, that
OBR and CBI have said, and the Bank
of England, that the measures we
have taken have prevented economic
starring, that
scarring, that they would have been
starring, that they would have been
much
scarring, that they would have been
much more severe economic
consequences, many more
consequences, many morejobs
much more severe economic
consequences, many more jobs lost,
if we had not introduced things like
the fellow scheme and protecting 7.5
million people now at a cost of £10
million peopla now at a cost of £10
billion, and
million people now at a cost of £10
billion, and just under a million
businesses are having their staff
protected. The measures we put in
place with the unemployment support
scheme on its first day, 440,000
applications. We have taken a
decisive, quick action, to protect
the economy, because yes, it is
expensive, the measures we are
putting in place, but the
alternative of not doing so would
have caused much more economic
damage. Mick? Is the Pill worlds
than the ill? That was the question.
I wonder whether we are in a
position where, you know, how we got
here in the first place, you know,
after ten years of austerity, as a
country, could we have been better
prepared for this pandemic and
whether or not we should have been
in the situation that we reacted too
late, was their complacency? Because
some of these questions are material
to actually how we have handled the
crisis since. My sense is, no, we
were complacent at the start of it
and actually, as a country,
austerity, including the NHS and
rare
care homes, the civil service, some
rare homes, the civil service, some
of the key
care homes, the civil service, some
of the key fabrics of this country
of the key fabric of this country
have
of the key fabrics of this country
have been damaged, and this has
damaged the ability to deal with
this crisis and it is going to
damage our ability to get out of
this crisis. 50 some of the seeds of
this crisis. So some of the seeds of
this and
this crisis. 50 some of the seeds of
this and the reason why we are in
trouble go way back and previous
decisions
troubla go way back and previous
decisions by
trouble go way back and previous
decisions by previous governments,
predominantly Conservative
governments, I have to say and that
is why we are in the mess today in
terms of trying to deal with these
issues. We don’t have the fabric,
the social fabric, the
infrastructure, that we should have
infrastmclure, that we should have
had if we
infrastructure, that we should have
had if we hadn’t had ten years of
austerity. It is actually the
opposite, it is because we took the
decisions we did over the last
decade to get the deficit down...
That is a load of Tosh! That we have
been able to have the level of
borrowing we have to meet the
challenges we face. It is as a
consequence of those decisions that
we ran
we can step up and put in place
we ran step up and put in place
schemes
we can step up and put in place
schemes like the fellow scheme that
have protected so many workers. So
the fact you
have protected so many workers. 50
the fact you had to hire so many
more extra nurses and try to get
people coming out of retirement was
not a function of the fact... 7
not a function of the fact...? It is
not a function of the fact... ? It is
an
not a function of the fact...? It is
an unprecedented situation. But
nevertheless, we were down on than
others, weren’t we? But the fact is
we have done that without NHS
capacity being exceeded and we have
met... There was a lot of talk on
programmes like this about
ventilators that the UK was going to
mn out of,
run out of, run out of capacity. We
mn out of, nm out of capacity. We
have been
run out of, run out of capacity. We
have been able to meet that capacity
but to Mick’s point, it is because
of the decisions taken over the last
ten years on the public finances
that we are now in a position to put
in place the economic measures. But
for the last ten years, we have also
seen social care consistently
overlooked and that is a problem
now, where we face a real challenge
within our social care sector, not
within our social rare sector, not
just in
within our social care sector, not
just in protecting workers, who are
doing incredible work looking after
some really vulnerable people at
this time but also the unacceptably
high death rate we are seeing in
rare
care homes. That comes down to the
rare homes. That comes down to the
fact we
care homes. That comes down to the
fact we have not had a proper plan
to resource social care, to train
to resource social rare, to train
the
to resource social care, to train
the workforce, and we are still no
closer to seeing that. The decisions
that have been taken over the last
decade have left us ill—prepared for
decade have left us ill-prepared for
this. We
decade have left us ill—prepared for
this. We will be constructive in
working with the government where
they get things right but we have to
be honest around the fact that our
pub“:
public services were not resilient
enough and family finances are not
resilient enough, either. Let me
bring in Debbie —— bring in Debbie
bring in Debbie -- bring in Debbie
in Scotland, I
bring in Debbie —— bring in Debbie
in Scotland, I know in terms of the
question from Erin, I know you
support the lockdown and you think
it should continue. But you must
also be concerned about the cost of
the economy, not
the economy, notjust in terms of
the economy, not just in terms of
jobs, hugely
the economy, notjust in terms of
jobs, hugely important though that
is but in terms of excess deaths,
deaths connected to mental health,
deprivation, because the economy is
suffering? Definitely, I mean, this
is the stress I felt when we went
into lockdown. I was thinking about
domestic abuse, kids out of school,
going hungry. It is very much, keep
pub“:
public health researchers up at
night, this is what we wanted to
avoid. I think to understand how we
got here, we have to go back in
time, 31st of December, China
time, Sist of December, China
notified the World Health
Organization of the novel pathogen
and the clock started and countries
and the dock started and countries
could prepare
and the clock started and countries
could prepare or not. The easiest
thing to do is nothing. Let the
vims mns
virus runs through, whoever makes
it, makes it. The second strategy is
used lockdown and release cycles so
in March because of what was
happening in Italy, it seems like we
had a sudden change in strategy from
the first to the second, to a
lockdown. It came very abruptly and
quite suddenly. And now we are
trying to transition to what many
countries went to from the start is
more public health infrastructure,
more public health infrastmclure,
testing,
more public health infrastructure,
testing, tracing, isolating. This is
what South Korea has done from the
start and this is why they never had
to shut down
to shutdown and their death rate
start and this is why they never had
to shut down and their death rate is
actually in the
to shutdown and their death rate is
actually in the low hundreds. If we
are looking at countries to emulate,
I would not be looking at Sweden but
South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong,
Australia, New Zealand, Norway,
Denmark, Greece and the list goes
on. OK, I’m going to bring in one
more question if I can from Bertie.
Hello.
We’ve all seen the footage
of overcrowded buses and trains
in London this week and whilst
Covid—19 is a global problem,
its transmission is local.
Spain and France have
implemented different policies
for the different regions and cities
of their countries.
The UK Government says it is always
guided by the science.
The question is simple,
what scientific evidence
could have been used
to conclude that Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland should
have different policies but London
should have the same as every
other region and city in England?
Bertie, do you think they should be
different even within England? Or do
you think everywhere should be the
same? The R rate is different across
the whole of England. You could be
the whola of England. You could be
losing
the whole of England. You could be
losing hundreds of Londoners to
their death and starving businesses
in areas like Cornwall where the R
rate is lower. I don’t think we are
ready to free anyone up yet but we
are definitely not ready to free
London up. Bridget, is there an
argument for doing it at different
rates across England? I understand
the point Bertie is making but I’m
not sure how practical it would be
getting that message across to the
public. There is a disproportionate
impact in this in some parts of the
country and particular communities.
In my part of the world, far fewer
people have the ability to work from
peopla have the ability to work from
home so
people have the ability to work from
home so that places an additional
burden on people. We have also seen,
of course, big differences in death
rates amongst our black and minority
ethnic communities which is a cause
of real concern and we really have
to look carefully as we move to the
next phase about whether it is more
dangerous in certain environments
for some people over and above
for some peopla over and above
others
for some people over and above
others and put in steps to keep
people are safe as possible. I’m not
peopla are safe as possible. I’m not
sure it
people are safe as possible. I’m not
sure it would be possible to suggest
sure it would be possibla to suggest
what
sure it would be possible to suggest
what Bertie is suggesting. There are
differences in approach in different
parts of the UK and some of that is
necessary, but some of it I think is
unfortunate and I hope the Prime
Minister will seek to bring a
greater national consensus on this
so we ran
so we can work together to defeat
so we ran work together to defeat
the vims.
so we can work together to defeat
the virus. One thing that would feed
the vims. One thing that would feed
into what
the virus. One thing that would feed
into what Bertie is saying, should
you want to introduce different
easing is of the lockdown in
different parts of the country is
the obviously big test track and
trace programme the government is
pursuing. Matt Hancock said he would
have the test, track and trace
system in place by the middle of the
month. That’s tomorrow, will it be
in place tomorrow? He will make a
statement to Parliament on that on
statement to Partiament on that on
Monday and it
statement to Parliament on that on
Monday and it will roll out next
week. So it will be in place? It
will roll out from next week and the
pilot has gone extremely well on the
Isle of Wight. One of the questions
asked about the app was whether
peopla
people would download it. More than
peopla would download it. More than
half the
people would download it. More than
half the people with smartphones on
half the peopla with smartphones on
the
half the people with smartphones on
the island have done so. One of the
other questions with it was whether
privacy would be a big constraint,
and yet in the feedback only 2%
and yet in the feedback only 296
cited
and yet in the feedback only 2%
cited privacy because the data is
kept on the phone until someone
contacts requesting a trace. Just to
contacts requesting a trace. just to
be clear
contacts requesting a trace. Just to
be clear what you have told us, is
it but next week test, track and
trace will be rolled out across the
UK, or is it the app that will be
rolled out? It will be set out in a
statement to Parliament, we get
criticised if Parliament doesn’t
criticised if Partiament doesn’t
hear
criticised if Parliament doesn’t
hear first...
hearfirst... What
criticised if Parliament doesn’t
hear first... What is
hearfirst... What is it
criticised if Parliament doesn’t
hear first... What is it that is
hear first. . . what is it that is
being rolled
hear first... What is it that is
being rolled out on Monday? He is
making a statement to
parliamentarians on Monday first
partiamentarians on Monday first
which
parliamentarians on Monday first
which is what the speaker has asked
us to do. To the point, the R rate
is from a huge amount of scientific
peer review. The tracing app will
enable us in the future to look at
enabla us in the future to look at
whether
enable us in the future to look at
whether there are localised impacts.
But we started the show saying we
need simpler messages. Now what
Bertie is saying in the future we
will need to be more nuanced, and
that’s why we do need to trust the
public. We do need to look at how we
get as many people to download the
get as many peopla to download the
3PP
app as
get as many people to download the
app as possible. What he is asking
app as possible. what he is asking
his... That
app as possible. What he is asking
his... That will enable in future to
his... That will enabla in future to
consider
his... That will enable in future to
consider what targeted action is
taken on a much more localised
basis. That is a possibility in the
future? Again, it will be subject to
the scientific advice but it is a
possibility of the app that you can
possibility of the app that you ran
then be
possibility of the app that you can
then be much quicker to react to
ﬂare-ups
flare—ups where they do occur and
ﬂare-ups where they do occur and
have a
flare—ups where they do occur and
have a more nuanced message to the
pub“:
public as a consequence. Nick? One
of the things that has confused our
members, we operate train services
to Scotland and Wales and all parts
to Scotland and Walas and all parts
of the great
to Scotland and Wales and all parts
of the great British Railways. ——
of the great British Railways. --
Mick.
of the great British Railways. ——
Mick. You’ve got to be careful. They
ran be a
can be a conduit, 3 way of
ran be a conduit, a way of
transmitting
can be a conduit, 3 way of
transmitting the virus. You don’t
transmitting the vims. You don’t
want one
transmitting the virus. You don’t
want one arrangement in one part of
the country versus another
arrangement in another part. We had
a bit of confusion and the
conversation we had when the
Scottish Government said you should
wear face coverings, face masks,
wearface coverings, face masks, and
wear face coverings, face masks, and
that is
wearface coverings, face masks, and
that is what they want in Scotland
ahead of what the UK Government were
saying around England. In Wales was
saying around England. In Walas was
saying
saying around England. In Wales was
saying something different. 50 in
saying something different. So in
all of
saying something different. 50 in
all of this with her got to remember
we are not one nation, when you
release the travel and allow people
to travel more you have to have
consistency across the whole rail
network to allow our members to
understand what to do, as well as
passengers. We have got to be very
careful in trying to have different
arrangements for different parts of
the country. It could spread or
otherwise. Are you as a union
recommending that all of your
members wear
members wearface
recommending that all of your
members wear face coverings at work?
We are in a position where we are
saying we believe it would be
beneficial for passengers, the users
of the services, as part of the
protections to wear a face mask. I
appreciate you cannot compel them to
do so but I’m wondering about your
members. Members have different
activities and we are seeking to get
them to her face
them to herface masks and
activities and we are seeking to get
them to her face masks and visors to
protect themselves. Some of the
so—called PPE, as it’s called, face
so-ralled PPE, as it’s called, face
coverings, for
so—called PPE, as it’s called, face
coverings, for example, doesn’t
protect the individual, it stops
transmission, which is not what PPE
in itself is meant for, personal
protective equipment. In Scotland
you are in a different position,
Devi, or it has been fractionally in
terms of exercise. Coming to
Bertie’s
Bertie’s question in terms of having
different easing is of the lockdown
in different regions, or even small
areas, does that strike you as a
good idea? Definitely. This is what
I’ve been saying from the beginning,
that we need to be working at
community level and seeing
transmission and making sure that
the economy since society is running
the economy since society is mnning
where
the economy since society is running
where transmission is low and where
it is high we try and get a handle
it is high we try and get a handla
on it. To
it is high we try and get a handle
on it. To come back to the phrase
following the signs, the thing I
want to
we nt to clarify
following the signs, the thing I
want to clarify as there is no
English science, Scottish science,
German science and Korean science.
Science is global, we have the same
information here among our
scientists as others in other
countries because we are working
together as a global community. Why
together as a global community. why
do you think
together as a global community. Why
do you think you are coming to a
different conclusion in Scotland
than the government in England?
Because they are political
decisions. For example, on the issue
of schools, we can present in
Scotland what we know as the
information on schools, we know
children can transmit the virus, to
children ran transmit the virus, to
a certain
children can transmit the virus, to
a certain extent they are carriers,
we are unsure of the degree, most
have mild symptoms, a few rare cases
have mild symptoms, a few rare rases
children
have mild symptoms, a few rare cases
children suffer severe symptoms a
few weeks later, that’s what we know
and what we can present. Political
and what we ran present. Political
leaders
and what we can present. Political
leaders have to weigh that against
the educational benefit, the kids
going back against the economic
effects, having working parents
going back, and looking at the
consequences of the infection
spreading wider. We can
spreading wider. We canjust
consequences of the infection
spreading wider. We can just present
spreading wider. We ranjust present
the
spreading wider. We can just present
the evidence and they have to make a
decision what to do with it. Bertie,
I ran see you
I can see you nodding away. I
I ran see you nodding away. I
totally agree
I can see you nodding away. I
totally agree with that. On
Stephen’s point, we have seen in
China the quarantining of different
regions, provinces, are you saying
the British people aren’t
intelligent enough to understand
that London is different to other
areas of the country? My point was
that we can be more nuanced in the
that we ran be more nuanced in the
messaging,
that we can be more nuanced in the
messaging, quite the opposite point.
In that simple message, are you not
leading to the deaths of hundreds of
Londoners who live in a world of
pub“:
public transport and driving out
loads of businesses that are in an
area where the R rate is further
down? In London the R rate, as I
understand it, is pretty low.
Obviously we started much higher but
at the moment it is pretty low. But
it wasn’t when the outbreak began.
If we are going back to a system
that’s similar to when the outbreak
was, that R will go back up. We can
was, that R will go back up. We ran
dearty see
was, that R will go back up. We can
clearly see there is more contact in
dearty see there is more contact in
London
clearly see there is more contact in
London than in other regions of the
country. That’s what caused the
higher critical care bed percentage,
higher critical rare bed percentage,
the higher
higher critical care bed percentage,
the higher number of deaths. Luke? I
think the government has an
impossible task and they will never
please everyone. The messaging, as
Stephen said, is very difficult to
get across well. I think that the
more complicated you make it by
dividing up the country and region
is, of even England, then the harder
it is going to be to get compliance.
Bringing in the example of China
locking down regions, China is a
communist dictatorship. They can
lockdown whoever they want and they
bring in the military to do it, so
bring in the military to do it, sol
bring in the military to do it, so I
think we
bring in the military to do it, sol
think we are not a comparable
think we are not a comparabla
society.
think we are not a comparable
society. We are a civilised
democracy, and therefore I don’t
think we can adopt the same sort of
think we ran adopt the same sort of
methods they
think we can adopt the same sort of
methods they use in China and it’s
not relevant. Yes, I mean, in China,
they kind of sealed people in their
homes. Yes, is that what we want? As
it is we have given up more
liberties than ever in the history
of this country over this lockdown.
We shouldn’t forget that, that we
are a free society and the way in
which we waved our rights so that we
are effectively under house arrest
as a nation should not be taken
lightly. Given that you are so
unhappy with the lockdown as it is,
can’t you see any merit in using it
more in some places in blessing
more in some places in blassing
others?
more in some places in blessing
others? It might have merit, yeah. I
think it’s complicated. It is likely
what is coming down the track, is
it, Stephen? What I’m saying is one
it, Stephen? what I’m saying is one
of the things
it, Stephen? What I’m saying is one
of the things the tracing app will
enabla
enable us to do is to react much
enabla us to do is to react much
more quickly to
enable us to do is to react much
more quickly to where there are any
potential spikes in infection and
have much better data so we can get
have much better data so we ran get
the testing in
have much better data so we can get
the testing in quickly and we can
the testing in quickly and we ran
respond
the testing in quickly and we can
respond quickly to those measures,
and that’s why it is so important we
get as many people downloading that
get as many peopla downloading that
app. It has
get as many people downloading that
app. It has been successful in the
Isle of Wight
Isle of Night in
app. It has been successful in the
Isle of Wight in terms of the number
Isle of Night in terms of the number
of people will
Isle of Wight in terms of the number
of people will stop and as it is
of peopla will stop and as it is
rolled
of people will stop and as it is
rolled out more widely, we need as
many people to download it. Did you
many peopla to download it. Did you
say half the
many people to download it. Did you
say half the population in the Isle
say half the population in the Isla
of Wight?
say half the population in the Isle
of Wight? Just over half of those
of Wight? just over half of those
with
of Wight? Just over half of those
with smartphones. You need about 60%
with smartphones. You need about 6096
to be
with smartphones. You need about 60%
to be successful, has it reached
about? The data is useful whatever
percentage it is. But the Department
of Health, as I say, will do a
further statement on it on Monday
and will set out where the pilot has
got. But the reports that I’ve had
is that more than half of the
population have downloaded the app.
Maybe we will all be downloading the
3PP
app at some point. We shall see.
Bertie, thank you for your question
and all the other question is fed in
this evening. Our time is up. Next
week we are looking for questions
from people living in London. As you
from peopla living in London. As you
have seen
from people living in London. As you
have seen from the programme this
week, we are inching our way back to
having more of your live on the
programme, the more the better as
far as I’m concerned. After London
the following week we will be in
Glasgow virtually, of course. So get
in touch by
Glasgow virtually, of course. 50 get
in touch by going to the Question
Time website and applying in the
usual way. If you want to carry on
the discussion you can join Adrian
the discussion you ran join Adrian
Chihs
the discussion you can join Adrian
Chiles and guests on Question Time
Extra Time on 5 live right now. But
for the moment, thank you to my
panel for coming into the studio and
Devi for joining
Devi forjoining us from Edinburgh
Devi for joining us from Edinburgh
and
Devi forjoining us from Edinburgh
and everybody who recorded a
question or got in touch via social
media with the programme. But for
now, until next week, from Question
Time, bye-bye.
One day, I will tell you
there are no new cases.
And I’ll read that the Nightingale
is closing down.
We’ll take time to reflect
and remember those lives lost.
And we’ll hug our loved ones.
Our kids will play
with their friends
and finally go back to school.
Sport will return...
..whether you like it or not.
Cafes, shops and cinemas
will open their doors.
One day, plans will be made,
and kept.
And, until then, we’ll be here
to help you understand
what’s happening,
every step of the way.
Things are a bit different
right now.
This...
..now looks more like this.
Teaching isn’tjust
a job for them,
but for you, as well.
We know it’s not easy,
so we had an idea.
BBC Bitesize Daily
is a learning programme
designed to help support you,
and to ensure
they don’t stop learning,
no matter their age.
The world may be on hold,
but your child’s education
doesn’t have to be.
Just tell me you’re ashamed of me.
I could never be ashamed of you.
Is yours done yet? Mine is.
I don’t want to bring someone into
Joe’s life without asking you first.
But I’m already thinking, "How long
till he starts calling him Dad"?
He loves you. Anyone can see that.
Brand—new The A Word continues...
Well, visual evidence is emerging
how different parts of the world
are coping with life now.
Yeah, it is.
I’ve sent some of them to you.
0h, have you?
Yeah.
Let me have a look.
So, look at your phone.
Exhibit A, this is Five
Dock Dining in Sydney.
Having a drdink with
a cardboard cutout.
Yeah.
0K.
It’s an Italian restaurant
and they fit cardboard cut out
at the empty tables,
so the restaurant feels
a bit less empty.
I’ve had less chatty dinner
companions in my time.
LAUGHING.
What are they having for dessert?
They are cheap dates, huh?
Exactly.
Apparently, they are going
to play tapes of chatter,
so that it sounds lass empty.
Oh, no.
Oh, that’s dire, isn’t it?
Then, Exhibit B, you
might’ve seen this one.
It’s been very prominent
this week, This a vegan
restaurant in Amsterdam,
where you have a four—course vegan
meal in a greenhouse.
Yeah.
Socially distanct from
all the other diners.
Suddenly, staying at home
doesn’t seem too bad.
Yeah, although...
That could be quite nice, actually.
You know what it’s like when you go
for a romantic meal, though,
and you’re, like nudging elbows
with the couple next to you.
That’s true.
It ruins it, so this is quite good.
That’s tme.
And as you get older,
"It’s very loud in here, isn’t it?"
Exactly!
It’s not just me, then.
And then this one, I’m not convinced
this last one is real.
In the week that pubs remain shut,
but garden centres opened...
Well, it’s innovative.
It’s a pub rebranded
as a garden centre.
Amazing.
What will they think of next?
Who knows.
Yeah, so, pop down to the garden
centre slash Speakeasy.
Not that I’ve seen, but if there is,
we will obviously bring it
to you on the Coronavirus Newscast.
And disapprove of it.
But something coming up
that we do approve of,
it’s the singer who has stolen
the nation’s hearts with her Friday
night kitchen sing—along.
Sophia Ellis-Bextor is coming on!
Yes!
This is very, very exciting.
In this episode of the
Coronavirus Newscast.
The Coronavirus Newscast
from the BBC.
Hello, it’s Adam in the studio.
And Laura in the same studio,
although two metres apart.
And Chris in a different studio
about 20 yards down the corridor,
doing the tourist thing of trying
to prop up the Big Ben
thing behind me.
Oh.
That’s nice.
It is Fergus in Studio 620
in New Broadcasting House.
What have you got behind you?
I’ve got a coronavirus Newscast ad.
0h, amazing.
It’s the Coronavirus
Newscast Zoom background.
Yes, the brand, which
is actually available.
Available, what?
Is it?
Yeah.
We have released a virtual
background for your conference
calling software that looks
like you are in the studio
and you even have Deano
over your shoulder.
No!
just like in the old days.
Send me the link, I’m
going to use it at all times.
Who needs the Golden Gate Bridge?
Now, there’s lot of medical
and science stuff to
get through tonight.
Yes.
So we are joined by
an actual professor,
it’s Professor Tom Solomon.
Hello, Tom.
Hi, hi.
And he’s...
My background is my kids,
if you are wondering.
0h, welcome!
And your professional background
is you are director of the UK’s
emerging infections research unit
at the University of Liverpool,
and you are a front line doctor.
What do you do on the front line?
Well, I am a neurologist,
so in the past, I’ve mostly focused
on patients with neurological
problems, and especially those
with neurological infections
which is one of my research areas,
but in recent weeks,
like everybody else,
I’ve been seeing lots of patients
with coronavirus infections.
OK, now, Fergus, we’ve got
lots of numbers to crunch
today because the Office
for National Statistics
published their first pass on this
big survey they are doing
of households in England
which will take a snapshot
of the coronavirus situation
at that point.
They published the first one today.
What did it tell us?
So, they surveyed 11,000
people and they estimate,
give or take a few tens
of thousands, that around 150,000
people in England at the moment
currently have coronavirus.
That is based on swab test results.
Now, that works out very, very
roughly at about one in 400 people.
That’s outside, big caveat, here,
outside of hospitals and care homes.
So that means, basically,
that you are unlikely
to bump into somebody,
literally, who has coronavirus,
but of course, if you are coming
into work on a tube,
on a train, on a bus,
or walking along, you don’t know
who that one in 400 people is.
So it is a reminder that social
distancing remains crucial.
I am trying to work out, Fergus,
if we should be surprised at that
number either being high or low.
Well, it was done at the end
of April, early May,
when the infection rate was already
falling quite a lot.
It would have been quite a lot
higher in early April.
But it would mean that if it stayed
at that rate, and clearly,
it goes up and down,
it would take something like,
I don’t know, six years
to get herd immunity.